Two visions of the Asian future shipped
just 20 minutes apart a week or so ago.
The one you pick changes how you work.
Open AI shipped an AI system that's
designed to be handed a task and left
alone. You walk away, it works for
hours, you come back to finished code.
Anthropic shipped Opus 4.6. It's
designed to plug into every tool you
use, coordinate teams of agents that
talk to each other, and it extends
beyond code into every kind of knowledge
work. same afternoon, two completely
different answers in February to the
same question. What should an AI agent
actually do for you? Most of the
coverage you're going to read is going
to frame this as a race. Who's ahead?
Open AI versus anthropic? Which
benchmark is higher? Who shipped first
and who is best? Look, I'm not here to
get into the benchmark thing. The story
that is really interesting to me is how
genuinely different visions of agents
fit into your work today. These both
exist as shipped products. The one you
reach for determines how your week
actually changes. How the time you spend
on AI shapes the things you can
accomplish. The gap between the releases
might be tiny 20 minutes. But the gap
around what these companies think agents
can do could not be wider.
And that gap is what I want to talk
about today. I covered Opus 4.6 in depth
in a separate video. what the model can
do, what the benchmarks mean, why the
fact that it can build a C compiler
matters. This video is more on the codec
side. What did OpenAI ship? How does it
work? And maybe if you don't understand
Codeex and you're not a coder, how would
you think about the approach to work
that Codeex has versus what Claude has
and what use cases you could use even as
a non-engineer? This is what the
divergence looks like if you strip away
the model names and the benchmark scores
and just think about how your week would
change. Codeex is a system that you hand
work to and you really can let go of it.
You describe the task well. Say it's
analyzing a codebase or processing a
bunch of documents and then you go do
something else. It will take its time.
hours later, sometimes many hours later
on complex coding challenges, the system
will let you know when it's done and you
can review it and you can figure out how
it works. By the way, some people are
actually hooking up their codeex
instances into messaging apps so that
Codex can let them know on their phones
when work is done. That's how long the
system is taking. That's true for cloud,
too. Meanwhile, Anthropic, the makers of
Claude, built a system that works inside
the tools that you already use and that
coordinates teams of agents that talk to
each other directly. I want to be clear
here. Codeex can run multi- aent systems
as well. But Anthropics teams of agents
are designed more for peer-to-peer
communication among themselves. Whereas
Codeex has adopted an agent framework
that is more strictly spaghetti shaped
where you actually have a central
planning agent and the codeex agents
stream out from that planner agent and
don't have a lot of interaction
together. Anthropics Opus 4.6 can hook
into your Slack easily. It can check
your project tracker. I talked in a
previous video about how important it is
to Anthropic to integrate with the
places where work already happens and
that's what we see with Opus' vision for
work in the 4.6 release. So you can
think of Codex as an employee who you
delegate to who might have a team
supporting them but you don't interact
with them a whole lot. You can think of
Claude more as a whole team that you're
directing. Codeex tends to optimize for
getting very complex technical
challenges right on its own. Claude
tends to optimize for fitting into how
you already work and then scaling across
your department and other departments to
enable AI powered work inside current
workflows. So codeex is more about
changing your workflows and claude is a
little bit more about fitting into your
existing workflows. If you lead a team,
the question you should be asking is not
which one is better here. It is which of
my team's workflows are delegationshaped
problems? send it away and come back to
me with finished work. And which are
more coordination problems where the
value comes from agents working across
multiple tools and talking to each
other, maybe talking to me, because the
answer determines which system changes
your operating model faster. And for
most organizations, you may need a mix
of both systems. With that framework in
mind, let's look a little bit more about
what's inside each of these. First,
codecs. The hand it off and walk away
experience that I'm describing with
codeex 5.3 is backed up by benchmark
scores that explain why it feels so
different from what came before.
Terminal Bench 2.0, the benchmark that
measures whether a model can sit down
with a real codebase and actually get
work done, not just solve toy problems.
Codeex really does well here. 4 point C
codeex 5.3 delivers a 77.3% score here
versus a notable gap with Opus 4.6 six,
which sits at 65.4%.
Codeex did not edge past this benchmark.
It cleared it by 12 points on a scale
where a single point improvement can
make the news. In practical terms, the
tasks your engineering team estimates at
two sprint days are the kind of work
codeex can handle overnight. Another
benchmark is OS World Verified, which
tests whether a model can operate a real
computer, navigate interfaces, handle
actual software environments. ODEX 5.3
scored 64.7%.
Its predecessor 5.2 managed only 38.2%
and it is 25% faster than 5.2 while
using 93% fewer tokens on the tasks
where previous models were most
wasteful. And so what does that add up
to? It's faster, it's cheaper, and it's
more capable. The usual trade-off
between capability and cost does not
apply here. I think the number that
matters most is not in the benchmarks
though. It's this. Codeex 5.3 is the
first frontier AI model that really
helped to build itself. Not
metaphorically. OpenAI used earlier
versions of codec during development to
debug training code, optimize
infrastructure, and identify issues in
the pipeline that built the final model.
The model didn't arrive magically from a
clean room. It was tested against real
production code bases from day one at
OpenAI. not synthetic benchmarks, not
curated problem sets. It was in the mess
building itself. That's why the
benchmark scores translate to production
capability in a way that maybe previous
scores often did not. One more result
worth noting because I think it signals
where capability is headed. Codeex 5.3
is the first model to receive a high
capability cyber security classification
in red team evaluators
concluded it could potentially automate
end-to-end cyber operations not assist
with fully automate. That finding
triggered additional safety protocols
before release and it's the kind of
result that makes government start
writing new rules. When a commercially
available model can autonomously conduct
the full cycle of a cyber operation, the
regulatory frameworks that we build
around human operated tools don't feel
very adequate. Sam Alman has called
Codex the most loved internal product
we've ever had. And having chatted with
folks at Codex, I fully believe that.
When the CEO of the company that made
Chat GPT says a different product is the
internal favorite, that should tell you
something about where value is starting
to shift inside the business that
understands these tools the best. I also
don't want to forget the Codeex app. 3
days before 5.3 dropped, OpenAI shipped
the Codeex desktop app. It's not a
chatbot. It's not a browser tab. It's a
native app that's designed from scratch
as a command center for managing
autonomous coding agents. Every task you
give codeex runs in its own work tree,
which is an isolated copy of your
codebase where the agent can make
changes without touching the code that
you're working on or another agent is
working on. If the agent's work is good,
you can merge it in. If not, you can
dump it. No risk to your working branch.
No merge conflicts with what you were
doing while the agent ran. So that means
multiple agents can run simultaneously
in separate threads, which is what I was
talking about, each with its own work
tree. You're not waiting for one task to
finish before starting the next. You
dispatch work the way a manager
dispatches work to a team. Here's the
problem. Go figure it out. Check in when
you're done. The app includes
automations like predefined triggers
that dispatch agents when conditions are
met. And if a new issue gets filed, an
agent can automatically start
investigating. If a test fails, an agent
can automatically start debugging. If a
PR lands, an agent can can automatically
review it, which matches the pattern at
OpenAI. So you define those triggers
once and the system can just run them
continuously. A skill system lets you
teach Codeex your codebas's conventions,
your team's pattern, your deployment
quirks. Code A skills system lets you
teach Codeex your codebases conventions,
your team's patterns, your deployment
quirks. Basically, persistent knowledge
that carries across sessions so the
agent doesn't start from scratch every
single time. Basically, the entire
development loop from I noticed a bug to
the fixes deployed lives in a single
interface now. And at no point does the
interface assume a human needs to write
the code. The result is an environment
where you're not writing code. You're
directing agents that write code the way
a manager directs reports. That sounds
like the future of AI to me. The hand it
off and walk away experience that codeex
as a whole is predicated upon only works
if you actually trust the output enough
to walk away. And this is what makes
that bet trustworthy. When you give
codeex a task, it does not start
autocompleting and typing right away.
Instead, it builds an internal plan. It
decomposes the problem. It runs its own
tests. It checks its own work. And
underneath it, there's a three layer
system that helps ensure it works well.
There's an orchestrator that manages the
overall task. Executors handle
individual subtasks and a recovery layer
detects failures and corrects them. The
entire system is designed for one
outcome, producing work you can trust
without reviewing every line. Because
guys, the world of reviewing every line
in code is over. Now, the tradeoff to
that whole approach is real. Codeex is
measurably slower on simple tasks than
tools that will prioritize speed. It's
just not designed for simple tasks. Now,
on complex tasks like a module
refactoring that touches a dozen or 20
files or a feature in a new codebase or
a bug that only surfaces under system
load, that correctness architecture
means you spend less total time because
you're not cleaning up after the model
or spending a long time figuring out
where the problem is. You hand off a
task your team estimated at a couple of
sprint days and you get to come back to
finished work. your net time investment
was maybe a light review and it wasn't
the execution at all. For an engineering
manager or a team lead, that math
changes frankly how you plan your
sprints and your team capacity and you
start to think about how your senior
people spend their time because you know
you can delegate more and more to
codeex. Codeex already practices
meaningful self-management from an
engineering perspective. The system
monitors its own quality. It corrects
its own errors. It reorganizes task
orders based on what it discovers while
working. The next step, agents deciding
on their own to spin up additional
agents when a task would benefit from
that, hasn't shipped yet, but the
three-layer system is designed to
support that kind of dynamism, and I
expect it soon. The orchestrator already
manages the orchestrator already manages
executor agents, and managing sub
orchestrator is a similar pattern, just
one level up. Our agent hierarchy
management is going to continue to level
up over the course of 2026 and Codeex is
designing an interface that is built for
that kind of scale. The distinction
between this and every AI tool you've
used comes down to what changes about
your day. A co-pilot would suggest the
next line while you're writing. It might
save you typing time. Codeex takes the
keys to the car and drives to the
destination while you do other work. So,
the co-pilot might make you faster at
the task, but the autonomous agent
eliminates the task from your schedule
entirely. It is a different operating
model, and it takes some getting used
to. Now, this is the part most coverage
misses. I use codecs for things that
have nothing to do with software
development. when I come out of a
three-hour meeting with a super dense
transcript, multiple threads of
conversation, no tagged speakers, action
items buried in tangents, decisions made
in the last 5 minutes, but but nobody
remembered to write them down. I just
dump that full transcript at codeex and
I ask it for a clean, scannable HTML
page that captures the meeting in a way
that people will actually read. key
decisions at the top, open questions
flagged, action items pulled out with
owners and deadlines, the whole tangled
mess of a long conversation organized
into something useful. And it does it.
It handles hours and hours and hours of
content without losing the thread at
all. Because the same architecture that
lets it sustain 7 hours or days of
autonomous coding lets it sustain deep
analysis of long complicated documents
really, really easily. The correctness
optimization turns out to be not just a
coding feature. It's a reasoning feature
and reasoning applies to everything.
That is just one of the non-obvious
implications of long-running agents
optimized for correctness. If you you
could hand it two years of employee
survey data and ask for a structured
analysis of retention risk factors. It
would read every response. It's going to
cross reference demographics. It will
identify patterns across time periods
and produce a report your CHRO can act
on. You could hand it a 400page
regulatory filing and ask it to check
compliance against your own internal
policies. It can hold both documents in
working memory and flag every single
discrepancy. The architecture does not
know or care whether the input is Python
or English. It cares about sustained
accurate processing of complex
information over long periods of time.
And that becomes useful whether or not
you write code. The pricing makes this
really striking. At 20 bucks a month, a
Chat GPT plus subscription includes full
access to codecs. Not a separate
product, not an enterprise add-on. The
entire autonomous agent capability
included. For context, the inference
compute required to run a 7-hour session
is, I would guess, a hex more easily
than a chatbot conversation over that
time period. You're burning way more
tokens. Open AAI is subsidizing agent
compute at scale. And that tells you
they're building for adoption. They want
people to use codecs. But it's time now
to look at the other side of the coin.
What does Opus 4.6 tell us about where
Enthropic is going and how different
that is from OpenAI and Codeex's vision?
Where Codeex bets on autonomous
correctness. Send it away. Trust the
output. Claude Code bets on integration.
It bets on coordination. It bets on
expanding what agent means beyond code
into explicitly every kind of knowledge
work. If Codex is the meticulous
employee who works alone in a quiet
room, Claude is more like the team that
sits in the open office floor plan, uses
your tools, and talks to each other
while they work. Claude Code's core is
minimal to the point of provocation. It
just has four tools. Read a file, write
a file, edit a file, run a bash command
in roughly 200 lines of code. No
orchestrator, no recovery system, no
multi-phase planner. All the
intelligence is in the model itself. The
simplicity exists for a specific reason.
It lets claude extend in any direction
through MCP model context protocol. The
model can connect to essentially any
external tool your organization already
uses. GitHub, Slack, Postgress, Google
Drive, you name it. Where Codeex works
in its own isolated world and hands you
back results, Claude works inside your
existing workflow, pulling from the same
sources your team uses and pushing
results to the same places they check.
For a team lead deciding between the
two, this becomes a very practical
distinction. Codeex will produce
excellent work in isolation and Claude
produces work that's already integrated
into how your organization operates.
Then there's the capability CEX doesn't
have agent teams. Where Codex runs
multiple agents in parallel but
independently, each working on its own
task, Claude's agents actually
coordinate. A lead agent decomposes a
project into work items. Specialist
agents can handle subsystems and the
agents can and do message each other
directly, resolving dependencies and
sharing context without routing
everything through a bottleneck.
13 distinct operations arise for
spawning, assigning, coordinating, and
communicating between agents. So, think
of it this way. Codex gives you, say,
five skilled contractors who each work
independently and hand you their
deliverables. Claude gives you a team
where the front-end specialist will tell
the back-end specialist, I need this API
endpoint shaped differently, and they
sort it out between themselves. Both are
really useful. They're useful for
structurally different problems. and
knowing which kind of problem you're
looking at is a skill that separates
people who get value from these tools
from people who get frustrated by them.
I would argue though that the biggest
divergence is not about coding at all.
It's about where each company thinks AI
agents are headed. Anthropic launched
Claude Co-work, a desktop application
that extends the agent paradigm to
knowledge work more broadly, not coding,
knowledge work as a whole. marketing
teams running content audits, finance
teams processing due diligence
documents, legal teams reviewing
contracts, you name it. The non-coding
implications of this work are concrete
and immediate. A finance analyst can use
Claude Co-work to hand a stack of due
diligence documents into the model and
get a set of evaluation criteria going.
And then the agent will read every page,
cross reference terms, flag risks, and
produce lawyer ready redlines. work that
took a team multiple days finished in a
couple of hours with the agent pulling
contacts from wherever it gets it from
Google Drive from MCP. Maybe it pushes
updates to Slack. This is all available
right now. Codeex could also analyze
those documents. It just would not route
results through your existing tools and
would require you to gather more of the
context. Codex is betting that the
biggest problems in the world are deep
problems where you will need to assign
an agent to just think about it for a
long time and there is extremely high
leverage on correct answers in the first
try. Claude is betting on a wider bet.
Claude wants agents in every workflow in
every department connected to every tool
all coordinating with each other. Codeex
might be built so the agent can work
alone and get it right. Claude is built
so agents can plug into your existing
tools and talk to each other as they go.
So here's what I've learned from using
both on a real work. The decision of
which to pick comes down to three
questions. First, can you tolerate
errors in the initial output or is it a
high correctness non-negotiable problem?
If you're a developer refactoring a
payment processing module or maybe a
finance director preparing board numbers
the execs must make decisions from
Codeex's correctness architecture can
earn the cost. Right? You hand it 200
vendor contracts and ask it to flag
every single non-standard term and it
won't miss things. If you're iterating
on something you'll review yourself
anyway, like drafting a blog post or
prototyping a dashboard, the correctness
overhead isn't worth it and you might
reach for clot. Second question, does
the task live inside one environment or
does it span a bunch of tools? Codeex
works in its own isolated world. It
takes whatever input you give it, it
does the work and it hands it back. That
isolation is a feature when the task is
very self-contained. Analyze this
codebase, build this component, audit
this data. But most knowledge work is
not very self-contained. a quarterly
close where the agent pulls actuals from
your accounting system, compares them
against the forecast in sheets, drafts
variance explanations in a doc. There's
a bunch of tools in that workflow. You
need to think about the tool you're
choosing in the context of where the
work lives. This is a situation where
claude is shaped for the distributed
nature of knowledge work and codeex is
shaped for an assumption that you will
want most heavy work done on a codebase
that codecs can see. Third question is
the work independent or interdependent?
If you have five separate contract
reviews that don't reference each other,
you might start up five codec sessions
in parallel and you get clean complete
tasks for each of them. If you have a
product launch where the press release
needs to reference and align with
landing page copy and the email sequence
needs to pull quotes from the press
release and the social post need to link
to the landing page. It's very
interdependent work where each piece
starts to shape the others. Claude's
agent team the press etc. And so the
answer what most people as much as you
would like is both in which tool the new
one know one that to understand and draw
from and that is why I am taking the
time here to share with you the specific
questions I ask myself when delegating
work across these tools. There's one
other question I think it's important
that we ask here. Which approach ages
better as capabilities improve every
quarter? Codeex's bet gets stronger if
individual agents keep getting more
capable fast enough that coordination
just becomes unnecessary. If an agent
can handle an entire system end to end,
not just a module, the whole thing, you
don't really need agents talking to each
other. The isolation that feels like a
constraint today becomes absolutely
irrelevant when a single agent is
powerful enough to hold a complete
project in its head. So the ceiling on
Codex's model is one agent is so capable
it can just delegate cleanly to sub
agents eventually and it doesn't need
teammates that can coordinate across.
And frankly given that Codex 5.3 nearly
doubled its predecessor scores tells me
that OpenAI thinks that's a reasonable
bet. I think Open AI also seems to think
that code itself is a lever for
attacking the rest of knowledge work.
That the rest of knowledge work is
starting to collapse into code. And if
they doled a code agent that prioritizes
correctness on very hard problems, they
are at the highest leverage point in the
ecosystem. Now Claude's bet gets
stronger if real work stays
fundamentally interdependent. If the
most valuable problems cannot be cleanly
decomposed into nice independent pieces
of work, no matter how smart a given
agent gets, if building a product isn't
just building a front end and a backend
separately and hoping they fit, or even
giving that all to the agent and hoping
it works, Claude is betting that we will
continue to need to see strange edge
cases, interdependencies, and frankly a
lot more human involvement in how we use
our AI thinking tools. tools. Remember,
Claude's branding right now is all
around thinking. And I think that the
product shape they're choosing is a tool
shape where they expect a human to
interact with Claude and think about all
of the edge cases and all of the
interdependencies and help shape the
final product through a lot of back and
forth with an agent in a loop, which is
really what Claude is. Then there's the
network effect that a lot of analysis
ignores. Every single new MCP
integration makes the entire system more
useful for everyone. So Claude's
flywheel compounds very quickly. Now MCP
support is enabled in OpenAI and Codeex.
That's not a problem. But Codeex's
isolated architecture doesn't
automatically benefit from it in the
same way. A Codeex agent cannot see your
Jira board today nearly as easily as
Claude. And if that's still the case
when codec 6.0 know ships or whenever
that will be. Then Claude's
protocol-based approach means the
integration ecosystem can continue to
develop over time in a way that gives
Claude a structural advantage if we're
still using those other tools. Codeex is
kind of betting that yes, you can roll
your own. You can get connections into
those tools as you need to, but
fundamentally the future of work is not
in ticket boards. The future of work is
not in documents. It may not even be in
spreadsheets. The future of work is
code. And that knowledgework expansion
question is the sleeper factor. If
agents stay in engineering, both
approaches can work and the choice can
be about workflow preference. Claude is
explicitly betting that agents will move
into every department. Codeex seems to
be starting to bet that agents will
matter in code and department work will
collapse into code. I think that's a
very different vision of the future and
I'm very curious to see which one starts
to bear out. It's also possible these
approaches will converge. Codeex is
likely to add some integration
capabilities. Claude will likely deepen
its correctness architecture. Successful
products tend to borrow from each other.
iOS has gained customization and Android
has gained polish over the years. But
starting philosophies do shape products
downstream. The way an initial decision
echoes through every feature, every
default, every assumption that's baked
into the user experience. Open AI really
started from the idea that correctness
matters and agents should solve very
hard problems in code. Anthropic started
from agents should work together inside
your tools. 10 generations later, those
starting points are still going to be
visible in how those systems approach
work. If you're making decisions about
what to pick this quarter, this means
the choice isn't just which tool for
which task. It's which organizational
muscle do I want to build with my team,
right? Do I want to build delegation? Do
I want to build coordination? Which one
serves the work my team does? If your
highest value work is complicated,
self-contained technical projects, you
probably want to build that delegation
muscle with codeex. If your highest
value work crosses a lot of boundaries
and runs through a bunch of tools, you
may want to build the coordination
muscle with clot. If you have both, and
a lot of folks do, at least know when to
use which. I'll remind you again, the
people who are navigating a world where
releases can come 20 minutes apart are
not the ones who pick the tool and
commit and say, "No, no, no, no, no. I'm
not a codeex person or no no no no no no
I'm not a claude person. They're the
ones who develop the meta skill of
understanding new capabilities quickly
and they know how to restructure
workflows around those capabilities and
they know how to do it again when the
next release ships. So taste, judgment,
speed of adaptation, clarity about what
you really need, those become durable
advantages in a world where the
underlying tech is changing faster than
anybody can really absorb fully. The
person who rebuilt their workflow around
Opus 4.5 in Nove. The person who rebuilt
their workflow around Opus 4.5 in
November had to partially rebuild it
again around Opus 4.6. I know some of
those people. You will only thrive if
you are ready for that. If you expect
that and if you can adjust to that in a
way that you you barely notice because
AI just keeps coming and change is part
of your workflow. Now, so two visions of
the agent future ship 20 minutes apart.
Which one wins is the wrong question.
The right question is whether you are
building the capacity personally or
organizationally to use whichever one is
best for the work in front of you to ask
the right questions which that's why I
shared them in this video. The agent
world is arriving in 3D because it's
arriving with two different visions that
allow you to see a fully
three-dimensional agent realized world.
We would be silly to pretend that one is
better than the other. would be smart to
see both as competing visions and to use
our binocular vision to understand how
these competing visions of an agent
world shape the software and the future
of knowledge work. Look, probably
something we'll release next Wednesday
or Thursday or Friday. You will need to
figure this out again. I will be back
with another video. The one thing we
know is that even though things are
changing, some of these foundational
questions about what work means and how
AI agents should shape work, those are
not changing. And we can follow that
thread through when Codeex 5.4 ships or
when Opus 4.7 ships. And uh I'll be back
with a video then. Tears.